feat(61/STATUS-Community-History-Archives): add Status Community History (#610)
vacp2p/rfc: content/docs/rfcs/61/README.md

---
slug: 61
title: 61/STATUS-Community-History-Archives
name: Status Community History Archives
status: raw
category: Informational
editor: r4bbit <r4bbit@status.im>
contributors:
  - Sanaz Taheri <sanaz@status.im>
  - John Lea <john@status.im>
---

# Abstract

> Messages are stored permanently by store nodes ([13/WAKU2-STORE](/spec/13/)) for up to a certain configurable period of time, limited by the overall storage provided by a store node. Messages older than that period are no longer provided by store nodes, making it impossible for other nodes to request historical messages that go beyond that time range. This is especially problematic in the case of Status communities, where recently joined members of a community aren't able to request complete message histories of the community channels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Messages are stored permanently by store nodes ([13/WAKU2-STORE](/spec/13/)) for up to a certain configurable period of time, limited by the overall storage provided by a store node.
Messages older than that period are no longer provided by store nodes, making it impossible for other nodes to request historical messages that go beyond that time range. 
This raises issues in the case of Status communities, where recently joined members of a community are not able to request complete message histories of the community channels.
```

> This specification describes how community **control nodes** archive historical message data of their communities beyond the time range limit provided by store nodes using the [BitTorrent](https://bittorrent.org) protocol. It also describes how the archives are distributed to community members via the Status network, so they can fetch them and get access to a complete message history.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This specification describes how **Control Nodes** archive historical message data of their communities, beyond the time range limit provided by Store Nodes using the [BitTorrent](https://bittorrent.org) protocol.
It also describes how the archives are distributed to community members via the Status network, so they can fetch them and gain access to a complete message history.
```

| Store node           | A Waku node that implements [13/WAKU2-STORE](/spec/13/) |
| Waku network         | A group of Waku nodes forming a graph, connected via [11/WAKU2-RELAY](/spec/11/) |
| Status user          | An Status account that is used in a Status consumer product, such as Status Mobile or Status Desktop |
| Status node          | A Status client run by a Status application |
| Control node      | A Status node that owns the private key for a Status community |
| Community member     | A Status user that is part of a Status community, not owning the private key of the community |
| Community member node| A Status node with message archive capabilities enabled, run by a community member |
| Live messages        | Waku messages received through the Waku network |
| BitTorrent client    | A program implementing the [BitTorrent](https://bittorrent.org) protocol |
| Torrent/Torrent file | A file containing metadata about data to be downloaded by BitTorrent clients |
| Magnet link          | A link encoding the metadata provided by a torrent file ([Magnet URI scheme](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnet_URI_scheme)) |

# Supported platforms

> Creating, distributing, downloading and unpacking community history archives SHOULD only be supported in Status desktop clients. Status mobile are out of scope for this version of the service. However we may consider bringing this service to Status Mobile in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating, distributing, downloading and unpacking community history archives SHOULD only be supported in Status desktop clients. 
Status mobile is out of scope for this version of the service.
However we may consider bringing this service to Status Mobile in the future.
```

This section MAY also specify endpoint behaviour when receiving specific messages, e.g. the behaviour of certain caches etc.

# Requirements / Assumptions

This specification has the following assumptions:

> - Store nodes are available 24/7, ensuring constant live message availability
> - The storage time range limit is 30 days
> - Store nodes have enough storage to persist historical messages for up to 30 days
> - No store nodes have storage to persist historical messages older than 30 days
> - All nodes are honest
> - The network is reliable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Store nodes are available 24/7, ensuring constant live message availability.
- The storage time range limit is 30 days.
- Store nodes have enough storage to persist historical messages for up to 30 days.
- No store nodes have storage to persist historical messages older than 30 days.
- All nodes are honest.
- The network is reliable.
```

Furthermore, it assumes that:

> - Control nodes have enough storage to persist historical messages older than 30 days
> - Control nodes provide archives with historical messages **at least** every 30 days
> - Control nodes receive all community messages
> - Control nodes are honest
> - Control knows at least one store node from which it can query historical messages if need be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Control nodes have enough storage to persist historical messages older than 30 days.
- Control nodes provide archives with historical messages **at least** every 30 days.
- Control nodes receive all community messages.
- Control nodes are honest.
- Control nodes know at least one store node from which it can query historical messages.
```

> These assumptions are less than ideal and will be enhanced in future work. This [discussion](https://forum.vac.dev/t/status-communities-protocol-and-product-point-of-view/114) provides more information on that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These assumptions are less than ideal and will be enhanced in future work. This [forum discussion](https://forum.vac.dev/t/status-communities-protocol-and-product-point-of-view/114) provides more details.
```

# Overview

The following is a high-level overview of the user flow and features this specification describes. For more detailed descriptions, read the dedicated sections in this specification.

## Serving community history archives

> Control nodes go through the following (high level) process to provide community members with message histories (assumes control node is available 24/7):

Reviewer: Can we omit the (assumes control node is available 24/7) since we already describe it above?

Author: ```suggestion
Control nodes go through the following (high level) process to provide community members with message histories:
```

> 1. Community owner creates a Status community (previously known as [org channels](https://github.com/status-im/specs/pull/151)) which makes its node a Control node

Reviewer: Fullstops after each point here, please :)

> 1. Community owner creates a Status community (previously known as [org channels](https://github.com/status-im/specs/pull/151)) which makes its node a Control node

Author: ```suggestion
1. Community owner creates a Status community (previously known as [org channels](https://github.com/status-im/specs/pull/151)) which makes its node a Control node.
```

> 2. Community owner enables message archive capabilities (on by default but can be turned off as well - see [UI feature spec](https://github.com/status-im/feature-specs/pull/36))

Author: ```suggestion
2. Community owner enables message archive capabilities (on by default but can be turned off as well - see [UI feature spec](https://github.com/status-im/feature-specs/pull/36)).
```

> 3. A special type of channel to exchange metadata about the archival data is created, this channel is not visible in the user interface

Author: ```suggestion
3. A special type of channel to exchange metadata about the archival data is created, this channel is not visible in the user interface.
```

> 4. Community owner invites community members 

Author: ```suggestion
4. Community owner invites community members.
```

> 5. Control node receives messages published in channels and stores them into a local database

Author: ```suggestion
5. Control node receives messages published in channels and stores them into a local database.
```

> 6. After 7 days, the control node exports and compresses last 7 days worth of messages from database and bundles it together with a [message archive index](#waku-message-archive-index) into a torrent, from which it then creates a magnet link ([Magnet URI scheme](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnet_URI_scheme), [Extensions for Peers to Send Metadata Files](https://www.bittorrent.org/beps/bep_0009.html)) 

Author: ```suggestion
6. After 7 days, the control node exports and compresses last 7 days worth of messages from database and bundles it together with a [message archive index](#waku-message-archive-index) into a torrent, from which it then creates a magnet link ([Magnet URI scheme](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnet_URI_scheme), [Extensions for Peers to Send Metadata Files](https://www.bittorrent.org/beps/bep_0009.html)). 
```

> 7. Control node sends the magnet link created in step 6 to community members via special channel created in step 3 through the Waku network

Author: ```suggestion
7. Control node sends the magnet link created in step 6 to community members via special channel created in step 3 through the Waku network.
```

> 8. Every subsequent 7 days, steps 6 and 7 are repeated and the new message archive data is appended to the previously created message archive data 

Author: ```suggestion
8. Every subsequent 7 days, steps 6 and 7 are repeated and the new message archive data is appended to the previously created message archive data.
```

1. User joins community and becomes community member (see [org channels spec](https://github.com/status-im/specs/pull/151))
2. By joining a community, member nodes automatically subscribe to special channel for message archive metadata exchange provided by the community
3. Member node requests live message history (last 30 days) of all the community channels including the special channel from store nodes
4. Member node receives waku message ([14/WAKU2-MESSAGE](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/14/)) that contains the metadata magnet link from the special channel
5. Member node extracts the magnet link from the waku message and passes it to torrent client
6. Member node downloads [message archive index](#message-history-archive-index) file and determines which message archives are not downloaded yet (all or some)
7. Member node fetches missing message archive data via torrent
8. Member node unpacks and decompresses message archive data to then hydrate its local database, deleting any messages for that community that the database previously stored in the same time range as covered by the message history archive

# Storing live messages

> For archival data serving, the control node MUST store live messages as [14/WAKU2-MESSAGE](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/14/). This is in addition to their database of application messages. This is required to provide confidentiality, authenticity, and integrity of message data distributed via the BitTorrent layer, and later validated by community members when they unpack message history archives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For archival data serving, the control node MUST store live messages as [14/WAKU2-MESSAGE](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/14/).
This is in addition to their database of application messages. 
This is required to provide confidentiality, authenticity, and integrity of message data distributed via the BitTorrent layer, and later validated by community members when they unpack message history archives.
```

Control nodes SHOULD remove those messages from their local databases once they are older than 30 days and after they have been turned into message archives and distributed to the BitTorrent network.

## Exporting messages for bundling

Control nodes export Waku messages from their local database for creating and bundling history archives using the following criteria:

- Waku messages to be exported MUST have a `contentTopic` that match any of the topics of the community channels
- Waku messages to be exported MUST have a `timestamp` that lies within a time range of 7 days

The `timestamp` is determined by the context in which the control node attempts to create a message history archives as described below:

1. The control node attempts to create an archive periodically for the past seven days (including the current day). In this case, the `timestamp` has to lie within those 7 days.
2. The control node has been offline (control node's main process has stopped and needs restart) and attempts to create archives for all the live messages it has missed since it went offline. In this case, the `timestamp` has to lie within the day the latest message was received and the current day.

> Exported messages MUST be restored as [14/WAKU2-MESSAGE](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/14/) for bundling. Waku messages that are older than 30 days and have been exported for bundling can be removed from the control node's database (control nodes still maintain a database of application messages).

Author: ```suggestion
Exported messages MUST be restored as [14/WAKU2-MESSAGE](/spec/14/) for bundling. Waku messages that are older than 30 days and have been exported for bundling can be removed from the control node's database (control nodes still maintain a database of application messages).
```

# Message history archives

> Message history archives are represented as `WakuMessageArchive` and created from waku messages exported from the local database. Message history archives are implemented using the following protocol buffer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Message history archives are represented as `WakuMessageArchive` and created from waku messages exported from the local database. 
Message history archives are implemented using the following protocol buffer.
```

Reviewer: Maybe link to the waku message spec here? :)

Author: ```suggestion
Message history archives are represented as `WakuMessageArchive` and created from [waku messages](/spec/14/) exported from the local database. Message history archives are implemented using the following protocol buffer.
```

## WakuMessageHistoryArchive

The `from` field SHOULD contain a timestamp of the time range's lower bound.

> Its type parallels the `timestamp` of [WakuMessage](/spec/14/#payloads).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The type parallels the `timestamp` of [WakuMessage](/spec/14/#payloads).
```

This means there's a possibility member nodes will download the same data at least twice.

## Multiple community owners

It is possible for control nodes to export the private key of their owned community and pass it to other users so they become control nodes as well. This means, it's possible for multiple control nodes to exist.

This might conflict with the assumption that the control node serves as a single source of thruth. Multiple control nodes can have different message histories.

Not only will multiple control nodes multiply the amount of archive index messages being distributed to the network, they might also contain different sets of magnet links and their corresponding hashes.

Even if just a single message is missing in one of the histories, the hashes presented in archive indices will look completely different, resulting in the community member node to download the corresponding archive (which might be identical to an archive that was already downloaded, except for that one message).

# Copyright

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

> # References

Reviewer: Maybe add references to the original spec here? or the implementation?

Author: This is a tough one. There's no original spec, or are you referring to the PRs that lived in status/specs?
Implementation lives in multiple places in status-go, how would you go about linking to that? 
Listing links to lines of code of some commit hash (to ensure it doesn't break with forward changes)?

Reviewer 2: Also for the other specs we are porting: the old status spec page is meant to shut down.
Imo, it is OK not to have this link. We can mention, it moved.

For other specs, where we have a previously published spec, we could add a copy (on rfc.vac.dev) to keep as version history for specs that were in draft state (or higher).
(This process still has to be included in the COSS, but has been used here https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/12/ ; see previous version link.)

---
slug: 61
title: 61/STATUS-Community-History-Archives
name: Status Community History Archives
status: raw

> category: Informational

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
category: Standards Track
```

Reviewer 2: It is not a standard yet (only once stable); but it moves towards one.

editor: r4bbit <r4bbit@status.im>
contributors:
  - Sanaz Taheri <sanaz@status.im>
  - John Lea <john@status.im>
---

# Abstract

Messages are stored permanently by store nodes ([13/WAKU2-STORE](/spec/13/)) for up to a certain configurable period of time, limited by the overall storage provided by a store node.
Messages older than that period are no longer provided by store nodes, making it impossible for other nodes to request historical messages that go beyond that time range. 
This raises issues in the case of Status communities, where recently joined members of a community are not able to request complete message histories of the community channels.

> This specification describes how **Control Nodes** archive historical message data of their communities, beyond the time range limit provided by Store Nodes using the [BitTorrent](https://bittorrent.org) protocol.

Reviewer 2: Even though control nodes get specified a few lines below, it would still be helpful to quickly explain what they are here.
Maybe:
**control nodes** (which are specific nodes in Status communities) ...

Because this concept does not exist in Waku.

It also describes how the archives are distributed to community members via the Status network, so they can fetch them and gain access to a complete message history.

# Terminology

> The following terminology is used throughout this specification:

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a "note" here, making even more explicit that some of these nodes types operate on the Waku layer while others are on the Status community layer.
A Status node wraps a Waku node.

| Name                 | References |
| -------------------- | --- |
| Waku node            | An Waku node ([10/WAKU2](/spec/10/)) that implements [11/WAKU2-RELAY](/spec/11/)|
| Store node           | A Waku node that implements [13/WAKU2-STORE](/spec/13/) |
| Waku network         | A group of Waku nodes forming a graph, connected via [11/WAKU2-RELAY](/spec/11/) |
| Status user          | An Status account that is used in a Status consumer product, such as Status Mobile or Status Desktop |
| Status node          | A Status client run by a Status application |

> | Control node      | A Status node that owns the private key for a Status community |

Reviewer 2: Is there only a single control node, or can they share the secret?

Author: At this point in time, there can theoretically multiple control nodes, if you share the private key for the community with another node (owning private key == being a control node).

However, this is currently being changed, such that, one can securely transfer a private key to another node, but it will then be removed from the current node, resulting in only one node actively maintaining the key.

| Community member     | A Status user that is part of a Status community, not owning the private key of the community |
| Community member node| A Status node with message archive capabilities enabled, run by a community member |
| Live messages        | Waku messages received through the Waku network |
| BitTorrent client    | A program implementing the [BitTorrent](https://bittorrent.org) protocol |
| Torrent/Torrent file | A file containing metadata about data to be downloaded by BitTorrent clients |
| Magnet link          | A link encoding the metadata provided by a torrent file ([Magnet URI scheme](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Magnet_URI_scheme)) |

# Supported platforms

Creating, distributing, downloading and unpacking community history archives SHOULD only be supported in Status desktop clients. 
Status mobile is out of scope for this version of the service.

> However we may consider bringing this service to Status Mobile in the future.

Reviewer 2: These are implementation details that should not be part of the spec.
Also `Supported platforms` in general should not be in a spec.
We could mention reasons for not putting this in a mobile implementation in the implementations suggestions section towards the end.

A sub-section of this could be "implementation status" listing the implementations.
I'd prefer to not have this in a spec at all, because the spec should become immutable at a certain point, while implementation support can still change.

Author: Removed it entirely

This section MAY also specify endpoint behaviour when receiving specific messages, e.g. the behaviour of certain caches etc.

# Requirements / Assumptions

This specification has the following assumptions:

> - Store nodes are available 24/7, ensuring constant live message availability.

Reviewer 2: I'd link to the store spec again here.

- The storage time range limit is 30 days.
- Store nodes have enough storage to persist historical messages for up to 30 days.
- No store nodes have storage to persist historical messages older than 30 days.
- All nodes are honest.
- The network is reliable.

Furthermore, it assumes that:

- Control nodes have enough storage to persist historical messages older than 30 days.
- Control nodes provide archives with historical messages **at least** every 30 days.
- Control nodes receive all community messages.

> - Control nodes are honest.

Reviewer 2: > Control nodes are honest.

This assumption should be mentioned in the security considerations section, too.

7. Control node sends the magnet link created in step 6 to community members via special channel created in step 3 through the Waku network.
8. Every subsequent 7 days, steps 6 and 7 are repeated and the new message archive data is appended to the previously created message archive data.

## Serving archives for missed messages

If the control node goes offline (where "offline" means, the control node's main process is no longer running), it MUST go through the following process:

1. Control node restarts
2. Control node requests messages from store nodes for the missed time range for all channels in their community
3. All missed messages are stored into control node's local message database
4. If 7 or more days have elapsed since the last message history torrent was created, the control node will perform step 6 and 7 of [Serving community history archives](#serving-community-history-archives) for every 7 days worth of messages in the missed time range (e.g. if the node was offline for 30 days, it will create 4 message history archives)

> 

Reviewer 2: If a control node is off for more than 30 days, can it get the info from other control nodes?

Author: The only thing it can do is try to grab messages from store nodes. If store nodes don't store messages for longer than 30 days, then this is the limit.

So one implicit requirement is that the control node comes online at least once every 30 days (in practice it's much more often though.)

## Receiving community history archives

Community member nodes go through the following (high level) process to fetch and restore community message histories:

> 1. User joins community and becomes community member (see [org channels spec](https://github.com/status-im/specs/pull/151))

Reviewer 2: We should link to https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/56/ instead

2. By joining a community, member nodes automatically subscribe to special channel for message archive metadata exchange provided by the community
3. Member node requests live message history (last 30 days) of all the community channels including the special channel from store nodes

> 4. Member node receives waku message ([14/WAKU2-MESSAGE](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/14/)) that contains the metadata magnet link from the special channel

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Member node receives Waku message ([14/WAKU2-MESSAGE](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/14/)) that contains the metadata magnet link from the special channel
```

> 5. Member node extracts the magnet link from the waku message and passes it to torrent client

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Member node extracts the magnet link from the Waku message and passes it to torrent client
```

we should generally capitalize Wake (not marking further spots anymore)

6. Member node downloads [message archive index](#message-history-archive-index) file and determines which message archives are not downloaded yet (all or some)
7. Member node fetches missing message archive data via torrent
8. Member node unpacks and decompresses message archive data to then hydrate its local database, deleting any messages for that community that the database previously stored in the same time range as covered by the message history archive

# Storing live messages

For archival data serving, the control node MUST store live messages as [14/WAKU2-MESSAGE](https://rfc.vac.dev/spec/14/).
This is in addition to their database of application messages. 
This is required to provide confidentiality, authenticity, and integrity of message data distributed via the BitTorrent layer, and later validated by community members when they unpack message history archives.

> Control nodes SHOULD remove those messages from their local databases once they are older than 30 days and after they have been turned into message archives and distributed to the BitTorrent network.

Reviewer 2: But they would still seed the archives after that time?

Author: Yes, they will still seed.
Generally, control nodes always seed one torrent per community. The torrent itself contains the entire data.
If the messages have been removed from the local database, they still exist in the archive data in the torrent.
That's why, in fact, a control node needs to be able to store a message thrice: once as `WakuMessage`, once as unwrapped application message (so it can be rendered on screen), and once as part of the archive in the torrent.

Only thing to note here is, if the Waku messages are removed from the database, the control node cannot recreate archives for those, unless it's able to recover those messages from store nodes (which is unlikely if the messages are older than 30 days).

Hence, the spec says "SHOULD", as it's more memory efficient, but it comes at a cost of course.
